#summary shFlags product information.
#labels Featured

= Overview =
shFlags is a Unix shell library to simplify the handling of command-line flags.

_Tested Operating Systems_
  * Linux ([http://ubuntu.com/ Ubuntu])
  * [http://www.apple.com/macosx/ Mac OS X] 10.5
  * [http://www.sun.com/software/solaris/ Solaris] 9, 10 

Tested Shells
  * Bourne Shell (`sh`)
  * [http://www.gnu.org/software/bash/ BASH] - GNU Bourne Again SHell (`bash`)
  * [http://gondor.apana.org.au/~herbert/dash/ DASH] (`dash`)
  * [http://www.kornshell.com/ Korn Shell] (`ksh`)
  * [http://web.cs.mun.ca/~michael/pdksh/ pdksh] - the Public Domain Korn Shell (`pdksh`) 

Development and testing of shFlags was done by Kate Ward. More products for Unix shell scripts can be found at http://forestent.com/wiki/Main_Page.

= Downloading =
If you would like to verify the GPG signatures of the releases, please take a look at my [http://forestent.com/wiki/Info:GnuPG GnuPG Info] page.

== 1.0.0 – Stable release ==
|| *Release* || *Date* ||
|| [http://shflags.googlecode.com/files/shflags-1.0.0.tgz 1.0.0] || Wed Jun 18 2008 ||

== 1.1.x – Development releases ==
_This release series hasn't been started yet._

= Miscellaneous =

== Licensing ==
shFlags is licensed under the GNU [http://www.gnu.org/licenses/lgpl.html Lesser General Public License] (LGPL). The contents and copyright of this site and all provided source code are owned by [http://www.linkedin.com/profile?viewProfile=&key=2483293&trk=tab_pro Kate Ward].

== Full Disclosure ==
Although I am currently an employee of Google Ireland, Ltd., the shFlags port of gFlags is not meant to reflect in any way on the work I do for Google. This product is not supported or endorsed by Google, and they should not be contacted for any problems you encounter with this product.

== Thanks ==
A list of contributors is provided with each release (found as `doc/contributors.txt`). Many thanks go out to each of these individuals for finding bugs and/or providing support or patches. 